alternative radio presents Philip Agee
on the CIA and Cuba I'm David bar Sammy
on the island of Cuba occupies a big
place in the imagination and policies of
the United States according to one
historian President Kennedy and his
brother Robert were obsessed with the
small Caribbean nation the landscape of
u.s. Cuba relations is dotted with the
Missile Crisis blockades embargoes and
boat refugees few know the details of
the extensive CIA operations against
Cuba they range from sabotage to
invasion to biological warfare to
assassination plots at one time the
Miami base CIA post was the largest
outside of headquarters in Langley
Virginia since its establishment in 1947
the CIA has run practically all of its
business in secret this is especially
true of its covert operations Philip
Agee has pried loose some of those
secrets he was a CIA officer from 1960
to 1968 he served in Ecuador Uruguay and
Mexico since resigning from the CIA he
has written and lectured widely on the
agency's clandestine activities he is
the author of inside the company and on
the run and now Philip Agee I did a lot
of damage to Cuba and to the Cuban
Revolution I also happen to be a person
whose ideas changed I resigned from the
CIA I was in my last post in Mexico City
and I stayed there that job was rather
odd because when I first went down to
South America at age 25
1960 I went down as a political officer
in the US Embassy in Quito Ecuador my
cover was as a US diplomat the same in
Uruguay where I went after three years
in Ecuador but when I went to Mexico I
went as the US Representative for the
1968 Olympic Games I went down there
calling myself the US Olympic attache I
was in the US Embassy my official title
was a special assistant to the
ambassador but I worked in the whole
Olympic organizing scene because there
were hundreds of people of interest to
the CIA in that Olympic organizing menu
there were people from the media there
were people from the pre the only
political party that counts there really
or at that time it was the case I there
were people from the local sports scene
from the cultural life and so forth and
so that's why I went down there to work
in the Olympics one and a half years
before the games actually happened but I
had already really decided to quit the
CIA and little by little I began to
realize that all of the activities that
I and my colleagues were involved in in
fact the whole US government program had
as its purpose one final goal and that
was to assure stability in what was
essentially and inherently a very
unstable situation because it was so
unfair the glue that held this system
together was political repression and
little by little I began to turn against
the people that we were supporting we
were supporting the status quo there we
were as I say seeking stability at all
costs and the glue that held it all
together was political repression in
which I was very much involved and so I
began to turn against the peoples that
were receiving our support because of
their greed because the corruption
because of the political repression that
was involved and then decided to stop
the work altogether
so about six months before the games I
informed the CIA in writing of my
resignation and that it would be
effective at the end of the games that
would be at the end of 1968 and that was
the case it's what happened and I
started a new life without any intention
of writing a book or taking any action
at all my idea was to simply start a new
life and forget those years in the CIA
one of the things I did was to go back
to school I enrolled in the National
University of Mexico in a doctoral
program in Latin American Studies I
thought maybe I would get that degree
and come back here and teach but after
months weeks and months really of doing
the reading and writing papers on the
conquest and the horror of the conquest
the genocide carried out against the
Native American people in in what is now
Latin America the United States policies
in Latin America through the years
because of that I for some reason began
to get this idea of doing something
about what I and my colleagues had been
doing in the CIA ie a book and no one
had ever done such a thing it was a very
big step to take and I finally decided
to do it I began looking for the
research materials in Mexico City so
that I could reconstruct events and show
our participation in the events but
unfortunately I could not find what I
needed there and I had to choose between
the studies and the book and I was very
highly motivated at the time so I chose
the book went to Europe and five years
after I had started the book was ready
it was out in early 1975 and that kind
of started a new life for me because it
was an instant bestseller and then came
out in many other languages and in the
United States here as well and I began
to see receiving invitations to go all
over
Europe and I went to the Caribbean I
went to Central America as well there
were 17 years when I didn't come back to
the United States on the advice of
lawyers and others whose political
judgment I respect they had all said
don't come back to the United States you
can be much more effective abroad keep
on writing doing the interviews and so
forth and don't risk prison coming back
to the United States there could be a
long and very expensive criminal trial
and you might even go to prison and so I
followed that advice for 17 years until
1987 when this book on the run was
coming out and my publisher wanted very
much for me to come back at that time to
do promotional work on the book here and
I thought it over talked it over with my
wife at some length over many months and
we finally decided the time had come to
take that risk everything I've been
doing all through the years had been
focused on the United States naturally
and the thing I wanted most to do all
those years was to come back and speak
with people just like you but I had put
it off finally I decided I would do it
and we came back and it turned out they
did not take any action against me I've
been coming back every year since then
two or three times on trips like this
I'm trying to interest people in Cuba
but it's also to denounce this lawless
arrogant and unconstitutional law in
which the government is trying to tell
us where we can cannot go and travel by
myself had been to Cuba many times I was
in Cuba before the Revolution and I was
back there in 1971 for the first time
since I left the CIA and I've been back
constantly ever since practically every
year I want to say a few words about the
CIA's long war against Cuba it's been
going on now for 35 years
coinciding with the trade embargo
in I I don't know how many of you are
familiar with the background I'm going
to assume that some of you or not but
when we speak of the Cuban Revolution
today we're talking about the
development of process that goes goes on
and goes back more than 100 years you
know the ideas of the Enlightenment
affected the educated elites in Latin
America just like they did the founding
fathers in the United States and they
had their independence movements which
culminated around 1820 1825 in the
independence from Spain of practically
all of Spanish colonies in the Western
Hemisphere Cuba was an exception as was
Puerto Rico the Spanish were able to
retain control in those countries in the
latter part of the 19th century the
independence movement in Cuba developed
there was a ten years war which failed
and then along came Jose Marti who is
considered the father of Cuban
independence he was in a Spanish prison
cracking rocks or stones for his
independence activities as a student and
he eventually got out came to the United
States formed the Cuban revolutionary
party and determined with others to read
initiate the independence movement
independence struggle from Spain and so
in 1895 he goes back to Cuba with the
others within two months he's dead
killed in action by the Spanish but the
movement goes on in by 1898 they have
more or less defeated the Spanish that
is when McKinley decides to intervene he
sends the Maine you know to expect
Havana Harbor there is a mysterious
explosion the ship sinks and hundreds of
sailors are killed
McKinley declares war on Spain and
intervenes snatching independence from
the hands of the Cuban independence
movement for years military occupation
1902 Cuba is given a kind of a pseudo
independence by the United States and it
was on the condition that the so-called
plateau amendment be incorporated into
their Constitution the Platt Amendment
after Orville Platt the senator and this
law or inclusion in the Cuban
Constitution gave the United States the
right to you
laterally intervene with military force
in Cuba any time at all to protect US
lives and property or simply to restore
public order
the Cubans live with this humiliation
for more than three decades finally in
the early 1950s along comes a young
lawyer and student leader Fidel Castro
he begins to organize a movement again
for Cuban independence from the United
States because they were in that typical
dependency situation Cuba had become
more or less a an island plantation
system for the United States US
interests owned the largest and best
properties ranches cane fields they
owned sugar mills they owned the
utilities the electricity the telephones
the public transportation systems and of
course the Mafia was there in a very big
way this was in the the vise meaning the
gambling and the numbers and the drugs
and the prostitution and so forth it was
burned by the Florida Mafia led at that
time by Meyer Lansky and Santo
Trafficante who happened to come from
Tampa my hometown this was a situation
in the early 1950s which the the forces
or the movement led by Fidel Castro was
determined to change the first major
event on their program was the assault
on the Moncada barracks in Santiago de
Cuba the second city way out in the
eastern portion of the island which was
a total failure it didn't even last 30
minutes Fidel's Buick broke down and
everything else that could go wrong went
wrong and most of them were captured the
Batista dictatorship of the time which
had overthrown the civilian government
the year before in 1952 and the assault
on Moncada is in July of 1953 this
military dictatorship was supported by
the United States and I'll give you some
examples in just a moment how it was
done but that Batista dictatorship
executed about 61 of the 120 or so who
assaulted the moncada barracks
in the first day or so the church
intervened and Fidel and the others were
saved but they were tried convicted and
sentenced to long prison terms Fidel for
15 years they were sent to the prisons
on the the prison on the Isle of Pines
which is the large island off the
southwestern coast of Cuba which has
since been renamed the Isle of youth and
in that on that island
there have been work study programs
going on for many many years now tens of
thousands of Africans have been educated
there where they have gone to school and
they have also worked in the extensive
citrus plantations or citrus groves on
the island they have come from mostly
black Africa from countries like Zambia
and Angola and South Africa Zimbabwe and
so forth part of the international
assistance programs of the revolution
well Fidel and the others only served
not even two years because there was an
amnesty movement which their supporters
on the outside organized it was very
successful and by May 1955 they were out
within a couple of months there in
Mexico planning to return training
acquiring weapons and so forth it was
1956 when Fidel swam the Rio Grande you
know over to McAllen Texas to meet with
Carlos prio the civilian president that
Batista had overthrown in 52 and prio
agreed to give Fidel money gave him one
hundred thousand one hundred thousand
dollars and with that money they bought
weapons they continued their training
and they found a yacht on which they
could sail back to the far eastern
province of Cuba known as Oriente and
begin the struggle the armed struggle
again against Batista this was a most
incredible thing that they could survive
and carry forth the revolution because
this boat which they paid $20,000 for it
was owned by an American who lived in
Mexico City had been sunk in a hurricane
and spent some time at the bottom and
had been raised but it needed a lot of
work and before they could could
complete their preparations they had to
leave precipitously because the Mexican
authorities authorities were closing in
they'd had a couple of defections from
the group and Batista was on to what
they were doing he had started maritime
and air patrols in the space between
Mexico and Cuba and so one late one
night after midnight in a storm in late
November of 1956 they set sail and it
was a nightmare all the way they was
stormy there was constant seasickness
diarrhea the they ran out of food and
water the Navigator fell overboard I
mean everything happened and they it all
ended in a shipwreck by the way they ran
aground on a mud flat some miles from
where they had intended to land and they
had to wade through hip-deep mud up to
the shore leaving behind their weapons
most of them and then what was waiting
on shore a huge mangles swamp mangrove
swamp that swallowed them up well it
looked like moncada all over again but
within a couple of weeks 12 of the 82
who had sailed had regrouped with Fidel
all the others were either killed or or
captured by Batista's Army and Air Force
because they were onto them on top of
them in fact from the day they arrived
the grandma was the name of the ship or
the yacht and it was built of wood in
1943 for a maximum of 25 people so you
can imagine what it was like with 82
plus the weapons plus the stores and
everything else took them a little more
than a week to get from to spawn on the
Mexican coast to Oriente well there were
12 men with Fidel going up into the
Sierra Maestra mountains this very high
rugged mountain range on the
southeastern coast of Cuba in December
1953 twelve men against Batista's army
of 40,000 but the most amazing thing is
that they were able in two years to
defeat Batista's army because of the
political repression that dictatorship
lost all the support it had it happens
that in 1956 which is the same year that
the CIA comes to recruit me at Notre
Dame and the same year of my
duration from there the CIA sets up a
political police for Batista called the
brach be RAC those are the Spanish
initials for the title of the
organization it was called the bureau
for repression of communist activities a
very good cover because Batista used
this secret police set up for him by the
CIA against all of his political
opponents not just communists and it
became famous or well-known for its
torture and for its assassinations of
Batista's political opponents it was
really a nasty dictatorship so nasty
that in 1958 as the revolutionary forces
were making gains very fast
the CIA inspector general who had helped
set up this brac in 1956 made a special
trip to Havana to speak to the chief of
brac and tell him to cool it to lay off
that he was turning everybody against
the regime because of the savageness of
this this secret police well that didn't
happen by December the revolutionary
forces had defeated the Batista army and
in on December 31st Batista fled to the
Dominican Republic on January 1st the
celebrations victory celebrations began
and grew larger and larger as Fidel and
the other leadership made their way from
town to town city to city from the
extreme eastern part of the island all
the way to the west to Havana and a week
later they entered to this tumultuous
political celebration the largest ever
seen in Cuba until that time well in
early January 1957
that's one month after the Granma
arrives they arrived the grandma arrives
on December 2nd I believe and I was
there the first week of January in Cuban
on my first trip and there I was able to
savor the food and the dance and the
music and some of the vice and when I
got back from Cuba from that trip the
the pull of adventure and a travel and
so forth was too great to resist and
that
when I wrote to the CIA saying I was
ready and went in six months later I was
in and as I told you I went to the Air
Force well I was back in the CIA
headquarters in the late summer of 1959
the first year of triumph or the
revolution to start the CIA's year-long
training program we would spend the
months from September to the end of
December in CIA classrooms in Washington
studying the national security
bureaucracy set up and also the
structure of the CIA and its missions
then in early January of 1960 we would
all go down to what we called the farm
it was a large CIA secret training base
the codename of which was isolation and
we all went down there in early January
the real name of the base was Camp Perry
it was supposedly a US Navy base when in
fact that was simply the cover it was
the CIA's most important training base
it was a very large expanse of property
just outside Williamsburg Virginia along
the shores of one of the rivers down in
the Tidewater area it was a very special
place that had a landing strip it had an
area for training in parachute jumping
and also an area for jumping and for
practicing with air drops of supplies
and equipment of all sorts it hasn't had
an area for explosives training ranges
for all types of weapons we were
assigned to a very special section of
the base which included our barracks
military style barracks and classrooms
and an officer's club and a baseball
diamond and a gym for martial arts
training that kind of thing and we would
be there for seven months until the end
of July more or less of 1960 well the
Cuban Revolution was was going very
strong from January 1959 on any Cuban
who was involved or who studied that
period can tell you that the easy part
was achieving power and the overthrow of
the Batista dictatorship making the
revolution
after taking power was the really hard
part that was the transformation of
Cuban society and they had lots of
obstacles to overcome many of them
coming from the United States the first
problems of the Cuba had with the United
States were the trials of Batista's
murderers and torturers who were
captured the chief of broch by the way
got away he went to Miami and later on
was work continued to work for the CIA
but his deputy was captured and this man
had been the principal brac liaison
officer with the CIA offices in the US
Embassy in Havana they tried him he was
convicted and sentenced to death
in fact he was not the only one there
were lots and these trials were public
they were broadcast on television and
they were held in the national sports
arena and enclosed sports palace in
Havana they were seen in the United
States as circus show trials and the
United States various figures in the
government denounced them including
senators who stood up in the Senate and
called for an end to this so-called
Cuban quote-unquote bloodbath and this
was the beginning of Cuba's problems
with the United States in the case of
this deputy chief of Brac once he was
sentenced to the party Don that's firing
squad the CIA intervened with Che
Guevara you all know who he is the
Argentine physician and revolutionary
who had joined with Fidel and his group
in the in Mexico and had come across on
the grandma feed che refused to take
action in fact he told the CIA we are
going to execute this man either as a
murderer and a torturer for Batista or
as an agent of the United States and the
next morning the man was shot by the
firing squad
the CIA chief at the time in Havana was
quoted then as saying this is an open
declaration of war and that was the
beginning of the problems that Cuba
would have with the United States by
March 1959 just three months after the
triumph of the revolution
Eisenhower and his national security
council were discussing ways to
overthrow the government and replace
them with people who were more aligned
with US interests so it happened very
early on before 1959 was over the CIA
was already developing an account a
revolutionary underground they were
training people in such things as
explosives and sabotage and they had
begun air drops to a counter
revolutionary guerrilla movement in the
s cambrai mountains another rugged
mountain range on the south-central
coast of Cuba so already in 1959 the
United States government through the CIA
as a sent attempting to destroy the
revolution well in 1960 while I was down
at Camp Perry in the training program we
were goo fifty-five by the way who the
CIA which the CIA brought in that year
of which only about five were women by
March 1960 Eisenhower had signed the
CIA's plan for overthrowing the
Revolution and that is the plan which
led to the Bay of Pigs in 1961 the plan
had four main aspects one the formation
of a unified political leadership for
the Cuban counter-revolution outside
Cuba this they did in Miami they call it
the revolutionary Democratic Front a
second part of it was propaganda
directed toward Cubans in Cuba
undermining the revolution accusing the
leadership of having betrayed the
revolution denouncing of course Batista
admitting that his regime was repressive
but at the same time saying that the
Cuban Revolution had been betrayed that
it was taken over by communists and so
forth that was the propaganda side of it
and this started very early on with
radio Swan on Swan Island a Honduran
possession in the Caribbean Swan Island
was a project of the Gibraltar steamship
corporation based in New York City a
company that despite the name never
owned a boat or ship of any kind it was
simply a front for this propaganda
operation at Radio Swan
a third part of the CIA's plan was to
develop and expand the underground in
Cuba and train more saboteurs more
people who could try to undermine and
and hurt the economy
the fourth part was then to recruit an
invasion force and in half both in
Havana and in the from on the Exile
community in Florida in Miami mostly
they recruited about 2,000 people gave
them some training in Florida but then
sent them over to a base especially
built for the purpose in the western
highlands of Guatemala and then in the
months ahead through 1960 and into all
into 1961 they were trained in Guatemala
we knew those of us in the agency at the
time even though we weren't involved in
this type of activity
we knew that an invasion was coming but
we didn't know when it happened that in
the middle of 1960 when I finished the
CIA's training course at this special
base down around Williamsburg I was
assigned to the western hemisphere
division of the clandestine services the
secret operations division of the agency
and the western hemisphere division was
concerned with Latin America and I had
had Spanish in high school in college
and so I was one of the various people
assigned there there was a great
expansion of this division because of
the influence of the Cuban Revolution we
our job was to neutralize that influence
or that impact and to isolate the Cuban
Revolution the policy was at that time
that any new trainee who just came out
of the program would have to spend about
or at least a year working in
headquarters in Washington before being
considered for an overseas assignment I
was very eager to get an overseas
assignment and you can imagine my
surprise and thrill when not even one
month on the job I was called into the
division chief's office and asked if I
would like to take a job down in South
America and I couldn't say yes fast
enough I went into full-time Spanish
training so that I'd be able to take
over agents right
who spoke nothing but Spanish and I was
assigned to the US Embassy as a diplomat
that was the cover political officer in
Quito the capital of Ecuador before 1960
was out was over this is early December
that year at age 25 I was down in
Ecuador taking over my first secret
operations for the agency and as I
mentioned they were targeted on the
Cuban presence in Ecuador their
diplomatic mission and against their
supporters in that country you're
listening to Philip Agee on the CIA and
Cuba this is alternative radio you can
order copies of this program by calling
us toll free at 1-800-455-1052
claiming to be defectors one landed in
Key West and one landed in Miami they
had carried out raids on Cuban Air Bases
the fact was they were part of the Cuban
exile Air Force trained by the CIA in
Puerto Cabezas Nicaragua with the full
cooperation of the Somoza dictatorship
of the time and the base at Puerto
Cabezas was nicknamed or given the
codename happy valley and the agency
gave the Cuban exiles are trained them
gave them about 17 b-26s and some c-54s
that's the military version of the dc4 -
an engine propeller plane and
by April 15th when this raid took place
the invasion force was leaving for the
Bay of Pigs on the South Bay south coast
of Cuba they had about six ships and
some landing craft the force was
supposed to wipe out Castro's Air Force
so that one of the essential conditions
for success could be achieved that is
air superiority over the beach the plan
was to take a beachhead at the Bay of
Pigs and hold it there was a small
airstrip there have to hold it for 72
hours and then the CIA would fly in the
civilian political leadership which they
had at all together waiting for the
flight over at opa-locka Marine Air Base
Air Station just outside Miami they had
to hold it for about 7 to 72 hours the
political leadership would come in and
they would declare themselves a
government in arms they would then
request assistance from the United
States and the Marines were all ready to
come ashore they were on ships just
across the horizon to the south of the
Bay of Pigs and as it happened the u2
reconnaissance on the Sunday the day
after that raid showed that they had not
wiped out the Cuban Air Force Fidel
still had something like 3 t-33 trainers
with machine guns and I think for sea
furies these are British belt
single-engine fighter bombers and one
b-26 left I think they had eight planes
left and they had I think six pilots to
fly them that's on the that's on the
revolutionary side and so the CIA went
to Kennedy and ask permission for
another pre-invasion raid to finish off
the Cuban Air Force and there had
already been such a stink about the
Saturday raid it had gone around the
world and the Cubans had shown it all on
television it was so transparent
everyone knew that these were not
defecting pilots from the Cuban Air
Force but they were CIA people that
Kennedy decided they would not have
another raid before the invasion they
would be able to fly support once the
invasion
and this decision of him of his not to
have a second raid was one of the
principal reasons why the whole thing
failed the other reason was that there
was no uprising and that was another of
the essential conditions it happened
that the the the the Cubans that is the
Revolutionary Government had very
effective security and intelligence
organizations from the time that Fidel
and the others were in prison on the
Isle of Pines they were developing these
services and they had been very
effective in penetrating the Exile
community they knew everything that was
going on they knew the invasion was
coming and so beginning the first of
April they began rounding up thousands
of people all over the island that they
thought might just show support for the
invasion when it did come and on the
very day of the invasion April 17th they
arrested something like thirty thirty
five thousand people in Havana alone and
just to put them on ice for a while and
so there was no show of support for the
invasion there was no general uprising
and that was a an essential condition
for success it was all over in 72 hours
within a couple of days the Cubans had
something like 1400 prisoners and
negotiations began early on for their
ransom reaching into the next year and I
believe it was December 1962 when
Kennedy finally got their freedom by
sending a shipment of worth 52 million
dollars in medicine and food over to to
Cuba and the Cubans then released the
Bay of Pigs people many of those Bay of
Pigs of veterans went on to bigger and
better things as terrorists for the CIA
through the 1960s 70s and into the 1980s
I'll mention a couple of things that
they did in a few minutes but I I think
is very important to understand that
there was no lesson learned in this Bay
of Pigs disaster which until then was
the biggest disaster the CIA had ever
had Kennedy appointed a special
commission of inquiry
following the disaster in it was known
as the Taylor committee under Maxwell
Taylor the general who was one of
Kennedy's principal military advisors
the Taylor committee rendered its report
in June of 1961 and the conclusion of
the report was that the United States
cannot live with this Cuban Revolution
as a neighbor over the long haul
we should develop new and more effective
operations and activities to weaken and
destroy the revolution through the
summer of 1961 the CIA headed an
interagency group which drew up a new
plan for attacking Cuba and Kennedy
signed off on this in November 1961 it
was known as Operation Mongoose the man
who was assigned to run this program was
General Edward Lansdale a legendary
figure within the CIA for his work in
the Philippines and later on in Vietnam
one of the things I didn't mention and I
should have and I'll go back to it was
that in 1960 in summer of 1960 as a part
of Eisenhower's March plan the CIA began
began the plotting of Fidel's
assassination and they did it by going
through the Mafia the Mafia had lost
everything in Cuba with the Revolution
because the revolution closed down the
casinos they closed down the numbers
games they stopped the drug trade they
took about ten or twelve thousand
prostitutes and sent them for training
in the textile industry and so the Mafia
had nothing left and the CIA went to the
Mafia knowing that they had their
contacts they had counter-revolutionary
contacts on the island from before and
that they stood a lot to gain if they
could overthrow the revolution and get a
foothold there again and so the
principal figures who worked with the
agency were the head of the mafia in
Chicago Johnny Sam Giancana and his
principal lieutenant Johnny Roselli
together with Santo Trafficante
again in Florida the agency gave poison
pills to Johnny Roselli who in turn gave
them
Tony de verona who was the cia's man
running the revolutionary Democratic
Front and the plan was to assassinate
Fidel with this poison on the eve of the
Bay of Pigs invasion of course we know
it didn't happen they in Devereux know
by the way passed the pills to someone
in Cuba who had access in a restaurant
where Fidel and Raul and Sheikh
frequently ate those were the three
perennial candidates for CIA
assassination plots under Operation
Mongoose the assassination plots
continued and the important part of that
plan operation Mongoose which kennedy as
I say signed off in signed or approved
in writing in November of 1961 was that
by October of 1962 the revolution would
be overthrown these assaults would
accumulate in the on that in that month
the Cubans through their own
intelligence organizations knew about
this new plan they knew about the month
October of 1962 being the the target
date for overthrow the revolution
through new assaults and so they went to
the Soviets early in 1962 and got their
agreement to station intermediate-range
nuclear tipped missiles in Cuba and this
is what led to the Missile Crisis of
October 1962 the only time the world has
been really within a hair of a nuclear
conflagration it is a very good example
of how these covered activities or
covered operations will boomerang and
there are many many examples through the
years that I could tell you but we don't
have time for that many going on rather
quickly
I would simply mention that Kennedy had
second thoughts after the Missile Crisis
and by the summer and fall of 1963 he
seems to have been convinced that
something had to be done some kind of
d'etat reached with Cuba some relaxation
or improvement in relations and so he
sent
a friend of his it was Jean Danielle the
editor of nouvel Observateur a news
magazine like Newsweek published in
Paris he sent her on one nail to Havana
to discuss with Fidel as a secret emesis
as his secret emissary to discuss with
Fidel ways in which some kind of
relaxation some kind of improvement in
relations with Cuba could be achieved
Jean Danielle was sitting with Fidel in
his office talking about this in Havana
when the aide came in with the first
word for Fidel that Kennedy had been
assassinated that very day that very
same day November 2nd 22nd 1963 the CIA
was giving a murder weapon to a Cuban in
Paris it was Desmond Fitzgerald a man
whom I knew he was one of the most
senior men working against Cuba in this
special Cuba tax task force within the
CIA he gave this weapon to Rolando
Cabella who had been a student leader in
Cuba significant figure in the
revolution but who had turned against it
and was working for the agency he had
access to Fidel the weapon was a
hypodermic syringe which was disguised
as a ballpoint pen and it was to be
loaded with a poison called black Li 40
which is very fast-acting and this man
Cabella was to inject it suddenly on
Fidel and he would be dead pretty quick
he never was able to do it obviously but
he did get caught rubella and sentenced
to 30 years in prison
Johnson when he took over from Kennedy
remember that he made that comment which
has been republished many times relating
how when he became president he
discovered that we were in his words
running a murder incorporated in the
Caribbean he backed off on the
assassination plots because Kennedy had
been assassinated for one thing I
believe and it wasn't until Nixon became
president in 1969 that these activities
were again renewed Nixon you know had
been the point man
for the Eisenhower administration in
supervising all these anti cuban
activities in the last years of the
Eisenhower administration including the
Bay of Pigs including the assassination
plots which began when Nixon was vice
president but Nixon Nixon by the way
began meteorological warfare against
Cuba seeding clouds over non
agricultural areas where there would be
torrential downpours and then no rains
over the cane fields I was in Cuba on my
first trip after I left the CIA in 1971
with Nixon in the White House when the
Cubans were slaughtering more than
500,000 pigs the CIA had introduced
African swine fever which decimated the
Cuban porcine herds this was the first
outbreak of this disease in the Western
Hemisphere in this century and the CIA
did it pork was a major source of
protein in the Cuban diet and still is
but at that time it was a catastrophe
what they had had to do to stop this
disease and then they had to start all
over again with what they had left in
terms of undeceased animals to begin
developing their herds all over again
this was under Nixon but Nixon also is a
very good example of the boomerang
effect or the adage that what goes
around comes around because they were
Cuban exiles trained by the CIA and who
had worked for the CIA who were arrested
burgling the Democratic National
Committee in the Watergate complex in
Washington in June 1972 so Nixon bit to
dust I guess you could say on this Cuban
thing and you remember that Nixon was so
paranoid that he bugged himself you
remember that don't you and those tapes
were eventually pried loose by the court
and there was the conversation Nixon
with his chief of staff Haldeman right
after the Watergate break-in and arrests
telling Haldeman we've got to cover this
up the cause the quote is it all tracks
back to the Bay of Pigs meaning to his
associations with the Mafia
and his involvement in the assassination
plots against Fidel which until that
time had not been revealed it wasn't
until the mid 1970s when the US Senate
and the House of Representative
representatives conducted their
investigations and then the Senate
committee under Frank Church the
Democrat of Iowa Idaho came up with
eight different CIA assassination plots
against Fidel the Cuban government has
provided the evidence to the United
States government of more than 30
different CIA assassinations plots
against Fidel well we all know that
Nixon took that fat retirement instead
of impeachment and Ford appointed George
Bush director of the CIA and it was
during the period of his directorship of
the CIA that a number of things happened
including CIA that is Cuban exile
involvement and these are people trained
by the CIA in the assassination in
Washington DC of orlando letelier's the
leader of the chilean exile community
Nixon's you know great success in Latin
America was of course the overthrow of
the I end a government a democratically
elected civilian government in Chile and
its replacement by the most savage
dictatorship perhaps of this century in
Latin America the Pinochet dictatorship
which was in power for 17 years and
which killed thousands of people that
was Nixon's principle triumph in his
foreign policy in Latin America well
another thing that happened under Bush
was not even two weeks after the murder
of Letelier Washington other Cuban
exiles who had also been trained for
trained by and worked for the CIA this
was a group under Orlando Bush the
former pediatrician who right now is in
Miami selling his paintings and going
scot-free a principal terrorists they
blew up a Cuban a Cuban a civilian
airliner just after it had taken off
from Barbados on its way back to Havana
and all seventy-three people aboard were
killed that was under Bush when that was
under Bush as director of the CIA when
Jimmy Carter came in there was a change
in policy
there was a relaxation of tension
briefly the travel ban was lifted and
the Cubans were allowed to establish a
diplomatic office in Washington an
intersection it's called the United
States did the same thing in Havana and
both were in effect embassies although
they are still called the in takes the
United States the United States
interests section of the Swiss Embassy
in Havana but for all practical purposes
these are embassies and it wasn't until
the last part of the Carter last year or
so of the carter administration
beginning in 1979 that he was forced to
harden relations with cuba because the
republican party was all over him about
this so-called soviet combat Brigade
that they had known about in Cuba since
the Missile Crisis but which the
Republicans made a very big deal of and
so things began to harden even under
Carter toward the end of his presidency
and then naturally when Bush and Reagan
came in as president they got even worse
one of the things that Nixon had done by
the way was to renew the assassination
plots against Fidel and under Reagan and
Bush you remember some of you those
arrogant remarks at the very beginning
in January 1981 Haig for example saying
that we're going to go to the source of
the troubles in El Salvador for example
he meant of course Cuba and there were a
whole series of new operations against
Cuba under Reagan and Bush there was a
new outbreak of porcine fever African
African swine fever during the last year
of the carter administration but then
there was hemorrhagic dengue which had
all the signs of being a CIA operation
which broke out in the 1980s on two
occasions in Cuba there again it was the
first outbreak in generations in Latin
America of this particular type of
of hemorrhagic dengue so it was
biological warfare all over against all
over again against Cuba and naturally
the economic strangulation went on and
on all through the years through the
blockade through attempts to destroy
Cuban foreign trade nevertheless the
Cubans have been able to survive and
somehow keep going they have installed
quite a few reforms which were just
unthinkable only a few years ago and you
can see them if you travel to Cuba but I
would simply mention this that among the
achievements the achievements of the
Cuban Revolution and they have
determined not to lose these
achievements are in the fields of health
and education and I would simply mention
this that Cuba has developed more
teachers it has more teachers per capita
than any other country in the world and
it has one of the most highly educated
populations in the world it has
eliminated illiteracy it did that early
on with the national literacy campaign
in 1961 the whole emphasis on education
has continued and despite this
catastrophic situation of recent years
not one single school has closed on the
public health side Cuba has more doctors
per capita than any other country in the
world and during this special period not
one clinic has had to close that to is a
remarkable achievement as a matter of
fact which to me is just amazing is that
they have reduced the infant mortality
figure from 10.2 purse 29.4 and that all
of these achievements on a per-capita
national income according to the CIA's
World Factbook with a per capita
national income of only 1,500 dollars
per year compare that with the United
States with in per capita income of
twenty two thousand five hundred dollars
per year their infant mortality infant
mortality at nine point four is equal
it's on a par with any developed country
with the developed countries with the
United States it's even lower than it is
in major cities in the United States
like Washington or New York or Chicago
or Los Angeles
Kuban life expectancy the other in
indicator for the public health is also
interesting a cuban man or male born
today is expected to live 74 years on
average a man born in the United States
today is expected to live 72 years and
women is the same 79 years in both
countries but compared Cuba with Mexico
or Brazil and remember that when you
consider Cuba it has to be in the
context of Latin America and the
comparisons with the rest of Latin
America it cannot be taken out of
context whether you're discussing
democracy or were you discussing the
quality of life in fact the Cubans had
been able to achieve the highest quality
of life in all of Latin America despite
the problems with the United States and
despite the blockade
well Mexico has twice the per capita
income of Cuba and their infant
mortality is twenty more than twice what
it is in Cuba Brazil has half again as
high half again as much per capita
income per year as Cuba and it's in more
infant mortality is 67 compared to nine
point four so you can see that there is
an incredible achievement here through
the revolutionary process that is now 35
years old thank you very much
that was Philip Agee on the CIA and Cuba
he spoke in Santa Cruz California this
classic from the AR archives was
recorded in 1994 Philip Agee is a former
Central Intelligence Agency officer who
served in Latin America since resigning
from the CIA he has been an outspoken
critic of the agency's covert operations
he's the author of inside the company
and on the run this program is produced
by alternative radio and unembarrassed
series based in Boulder Colorado since
its inception in 1986 AR is independent
we are supported solely by listeners
just like you we feature such voices as
Arundhati Roy Howard Zinn Noam Chomsky
tariq Ali and Naomi Klein we've also
done a series of programs on the CIA
with john stockwell Alfred McCoy and
Gary Webb to access our vast catalog go
to our website alternative radio dot
o-r-g again our website alternative
radio dot org to place a credit card
order for the program you just heard
Philip Agee on the CIA and Cuba call us
toll free at 1-800-455-1052
and troubadour singing ENSO yay go Fidel
and then came
you